Ayurvedic remedies for cough(Kasa roga)


For Infants & Toddlers:


1. Mulethi-Can be taken in the form of Mulethi water or kadha. Just take 1 teaspoon of Mulethi powder and add to 1 glass of warm water. Drink this twice a day. Even though the kids may not prefer it much you can also add other spices and make a kadha.

2. Tulsi- chew 4–5 tulsi leaves on empty stomach(early in the morning). You can continue to take Tulsi leaves  strengthen your immune systems.

3. Honey-Before going to bed at night, take a teaspoon of honey to reduce the severity of your cough. Continue until the cough does not improve. Take 1 teaspoon of freshly squeezed ginger juice, 1 pinch of black pepper, and some honey in boiling water.

4. Cinnamon-Add 1/4 teaspoon of cinnamon powder to 1 teaspoon of honey. For at least three days, combine and have your kids take it twice daily.

5. Giloy-You can have your kid take two teaspoons of Giloy juice with warm water on an empty stomach in the morning or opt for giloy tablets with some warm water in the morning if your child is comfortable with eating tablets.

6.Ajwain  Pouch-Dry roast ajwain seeds and put them in a clean cloth to create a pouch. Gently press this pouch on the infant's chest for a few seconds. The warmth and the aroma of ajwain can help relieve congestion.



For Adults:

1. Pippali-
Pippali Churna:
Take a pinch of pippali churna.
Swallow it with 1 teaspoon honey. 
Repeat 1-2 times a day and continue till cold and cough subsides.


2. Sonth-
Sonth with honey:
Take 1/4 teaspoon sonth and add to 1 teaspoon honey. 
Mix well and take it twice a day for at least 3 days.

Sonth Goli:
Take 2-3 tbsp of desi ghee in a pan. Keep the flame low.
Add 2-3 teaspoon jaggery powder and let it melt. To this add 2-3 tbsp sonth powder. Mix well.
Allow it to cool. 
Shape into bite-sized balls.
You can take 1 goli twice a day.

3. Honey-
Honey in Ginger Juice
Take 1 teaspoon honey.
Add 1 teaspoon of ginger juice and 1 pinch of black pepper.
Take once in the morning and once before going to bed at night to get relief from a sore throat and cough




Ayurvedic treatment approach for dry cough:


To treat ‘Vataja Kasa’ (most common dry cough) the following treatment plan is followed:

1. Application of oils and/or heat to the prana vaha srota (respiratory system). Eg. Sesame oil massaged into the chest followed by fomentation.
2. Ghrita (medicated ghee) administration. Ghee is prepared using warm or moist expectorant herbs: Kantakari, vasaka, licorice and wild cherry bark.
3. For the digestive system anuvasana basti (oil enema) or niruha basti (decoction enema) is done.
4. Prescription of Sitopaladi Churna. It is a combination of many herbs and spices with chief herb being Vamsa rochana.
5. Use the decoction of Sauf (Ani seeds) as the base water to make coffee or tea.
6. Consume turmeric powder mixed with honey three times a day.




Ayurvedic Formulations for Chronic Cough:


1. Sitopaladi Churn: Sitopaladi Churna is a classic Ayurvedic formulation that combines herbs like Sitopala (sugar candy), Vamshalochana (bamboo manna), Pippali (long pepper), and Ela (cardamom). It is commonly used to relieve cough, congestion, and respiratory discomfort.
2. Talisadi Churn: Talisadi Churna is another well-known Ayurvedic formula that contains herbs like Talisa (Abies webbiana), Vamshalochana, Pippali, and Ela. It helps manage chronic cough, asthma, and bronchitis.
3. Kanakasav: Kanakasava is an Ayurvedic liquid formulation that combines herbs like Vasaka, Kantakari, Guduchi (Tinospora cordifolia), and Bharangi (Clerodendrum serratum). It is beneficial in treating chronic cough, respiratory infections, and asthma.






Reference:-
Dr.Shalini L.S.(MD and Chief Physician)@saatwika.in


Charaka Samhita
Handbook on Ayurveda
Volume I
Edited by Gabriel Van Loon2
Legal Note from the editor: This book is not intended as a substitute for the medical
advice of physicians. The reader should consult his or her physician in matters relating to
his or her health, and particularly with respect to any procedures or techniques that may
be described in this book.
© Copyright by Gabriel Van Loon 2002, 2003
With generous permission –REQUESTED- from P.V. Sharma and
Chaukhambha Orientalia Publishers.3
Dedicated to
Dr. Vasant Lad, my first Ayurvedic teacher; to Sri Punarvasu Atreya, voice of the
Charaka Samhita; and to today’s Ayurvedic students and future Vaidyas.
Special Thanks to
The five or six elders who have taken time to teach me, and to my dear parents for their
loving support.
About the Author
Gabriel Van Loon graduated from the Ayurvedic Studies Program and the Gurukula
Intern Program under Dr. Vasant Lad at the Ayurvedic Institute in Albuquerque, N.M.
He founded the Durham Center for Ayurveda in 1998, where he runs the health clinic.
Mr. Van Loon specializes in treatment protocols based on the Charaka Samhita. Mr. Van
Loon is also an advisor to other health centers.45
Table of Contents
Section
Page
Volume I
1
Preface7
Principles11
2 Study101
3Diagnosis129
4Healthy Living199
5Treatment Procedures291
6 Fertility469
7 Formulation537
Volume II
8
Specific Diseases
62967
Preface
The Indian science of Ayurveda, or “life knowledge” has been practiced unbroken
for thousands of years, handed down from teacher to student. Ayurveda provides the
method for living a balanced life, for the prevention of disease and pain and for the
treatment of diseases presently thought to be incurable. Unfortunately, during the period
of British occupation of India, traditional arts, including the science of Ayurveda, were
actively discouraged; ‘Vaidyas’, or accomplished Ayurvedic masters, were persecuted
and numerous libraries and schools were burned to the ground. Since that time of foreign
occupation, India and it’s culture have slowly been recovering. But the truth is that
Ayurveda still remains in a semi-dormant state, a state of hibernation, waiting for those
earnest and perseverant students who will bring Ayurveda back to it’s full capacity.
Fortunately there are a few excellent texts which have been preserved from ancient times.
The Charaka Samhita is such a text. Recorded several thousand years ago from the
teachings of the sage Punarvasu Atreya, it is a gem of practical wisdom which remains to
this day the most respected work on Ayurveda. And fortunately for those students not
fluent in Sanskrit, a few good translations to English have been written.
So, what is unique about this version you are holding now? Great as the original
Charaka Samhita is, it is challenging to read. Information is scattered over hundreds of
pages and thousands of ‘sutras’. Further, it was written in poetic format which facilitated
the memorization of the full text, but resulted in sentences that could confuse the
inexperienced. Without ample insightful explanation from living teachers, this text has
been out of reach to the average Ayurvedic student, simply too much effort. I offer this
version as a comprehensive, user-friendly textbook for the medical student, and as a
reference book for health practitioners. However, even the newcomer to Ayurveda will
find interesting information on healthy living for happiness and longevity. The content
of this book has been taken completely from P.V. Sharma’s English translation of the
Charaka Samhita. Mr. Sharma has created an excellent English translation, with
painstaking attention to correct interpretation of the details such as vocabulary, grammer
and pharmacopoeia. Therefore, I have used the translations from his book word-for-word
as the base of this book. Students who wish to study the original sutras from the Charaka
Samhita are directed to the above text or one of the other fine translations. P.V.
Sharma’s edition is available through Chaukhambha Orientalia Publishers in New Delhi,
India. What I have done is spend several thousand hours interpreting and testing this
information from an applied clinical standpoint. The information has been collected by
subject. Unnecessary language has been pared down, in an attempt to illuminate the
intended meaning of each aphorism. Compact, difficult portions have been expanded and
explained. Headings have been installed at the beginning of each new group of
information. Where appropriate, information has been grouped into charts for easier
visual association. And what were complex bundles of formulas have been divided into
individual formulas and written out into a recipe format so one may at a glance get a feel
for the basic ratios and procedures involved. Finally, the information has been grouped
into coherent chapters and larger “sections”. At the same time I have done my best to
preserve the core message that was intended in each sentence of the original text. You
can be confident that no information from the original text has been left out; this is not an
abridged version. Consequently, when I did not feel confident to make an interpretation
of a sentence or statement, I left it as I found it. You will notice that much of the text in8
this book appears to be grammatically incorrect or incomplete. This is intentional and
reflects the most accurate interpretation of the aphorisms that I felt I could make without
sacrificing the original message. I may say that I have labored long and earnestly to form
this text that it should become a firm and helpful guide to the student and doctor in daily
use. I now send it forth in the confident hope that, the more it is put to the test of actual
use, the more it will grow in the esteem of its possessor.That being said, this is a work-in-
progress, and the editor earnestly requests Ayurvedic scholars, doctors and students to
communicate any suggestions which may tend to improve this book for its second
edition, which is currently under progress. Whatever can be done to make this book of
greater service to the medical and scholastic institutions will be gladly undertaken.
The editor may be reached at:
Gabriel Van Loon
The Durham Center for Ayurveda
1200 Broad St, Suite 300
Durham N.C. 27705 USA
(919) 286-2241
info@durhamayurveda.com
www.durhamayurveda.com9
On using this manual
1)Each Section has it’s own table of contents for fast and easy access.
2)If you are new to Ayurveda, reading just for fun, I recommend that you browse through
the various table of contents and pick out points that pique your interest. You will be
surprised by the array of interesting information.
3)If you are under the care of an Ayurvedic doctor, or want to follow an Ayurvedic
lifestyle, you only need to read Section 4, Healthy Living. You may also wish to read
Section 1, Principles. Some parts of this book are technical, so if you are new to
Ayurveda an introductory book such as Dr. Vasant Lad’s “Ayurveda, the Science of Self-
Healing” may also be helpful.
4)If you are a practitioner, you will find diagnosis and treatment by disease name listed in
the table of contents for Section 8, Specific Diseases. Further detail on evaluation,
principles and treatments can be located in the other sections as needed. I should
mention here that if you look at the table of contents for Section 8, Specific Diseases you
will notice that there are a lot of diseases which are not listed. Further, there are disease
categories which do not exist in Allopathic medicine. The outsider to Ayurveda may feel
that this categorization in the Charaka Samhita is incomplete and antiquated. However,
the further one studies and applies the diagnosis and treatment given in this classic text,
the more one is impressed that this classification is complete, competent and in several
cases is perhaps superior to the allopathic classification of diseases.
5)If you are a student, you may wish to read the chapters in order, or as your curriculum
requires. One hint: studying at the beginning all of the table of content pages for each
chapter is a good introduction to the breadth of Ayurveda, and will help you locate
information when you need it in future.
6)Comments by the editor will be printed in italics or inside [brackets]. Items of
particular interest will be marked in bold or with a * symbol.
7)When studying a statement, you can read it “backwards” to get twice as much
information out of it. For example, in the statement “Antagonism of foods becomes inert
due to: suitability, strong digestive power and young age” we can learn the direct
statement, i.e. that suitability, strong digestive power and young age will all help us to
avoid the problems of taking antagonistic foods. But we can also get insight about the
nature of youth; there is something about youth that makes it particularly conducive to
this effect. So, this one aphorism can tell us about not only antagonism of foods, but also
about the characteristics of youth. All the statements in the Charaka can be used in this
way to glean twice as much useful information.
8)Take the aphorism statements literally. You may be surprised by the wide yet specific
application of what are apparently obvious aphorisms of the Charaka.
9)It is recommended that you learn most of the Charaka before applying it; there are
many potentially dangerous procedures and medicines here. Also, the knowledge
required for their proper management is interspersed throughout the eight sections, not
just in the particular section it is listed. Many of the statements of the Charaka do not
come into full meaning until viewed in context of the rest of the work. So, when
something doesn’t make sense, continue studying the surrounding aphorisms or other
related passages for clues. For example, the right application of a purgative formula may
be further clarified upon study of paragraphs on “strength of the patient” and
“softness/hardness of the bowels”.10
How To Use Sutra References
A sutra is a verse or statement, like a sentence. Sutra means thread, because, like
the surgical word to “suture”, a thread strings together a series of ideas. The Charaka
Samhita is written in verse, to be chanted with a rhythm and meter. This aided the
aspiring student in committing the sutras to memory. Unfortunately the rhyme and meter
of the sutras are lost when translated into English, though we may catch their meaning.
In order to aid scholars who wish to compare this edited version of the Charaka with
sutras of the original, I have included sutra references. Each sentence, paragraph or chart
will have a sutra reference below it, which indicates which sutras the information comes
from. It looks like this:
Definition of Apasmara:
It is defined as departure of memory associated with entering into
unconsciousness and convulsions due to derangement of mind.
Ci14#26-29
A sutra reference is read like this:
Ci
section
14
chapter
#26-29
sutras
Here are the Sections and their abbreviations from the original Charaka Samhita:
Abbreviation
Number of Chapters
Section Name
(there are 120 in all)
Sutrasthana
Su
30
(summary)
Nidanasthana
Ni
18
(diagnosis)
Vimanasthana
Vi
8
(measurement)
Sarirasthana
Sa
8
(on the body)
Indriyasthana
In
12
(senses)
Cikitsisthana
Ci
30
(treatment)
Kalpasthana
Ka
12
Siddhisthana
Si
12
(skill)11
Section 1
Principles
Definitions and Theory p.12
The 10 Pairs of Qualitie p.20
The 5 Elements p.21
The 6 Tastes p.22
The 3 Doshas (Body Humors)- Vata, Pitta and Kaph p.35
Anatomy p.49
Agni (Digestion/ Metabolism) p.73
Mind, Senses and the Soul p.74
Time and seasons p.93
Types of Land p.9912
Definitions and Theory
Physician
Ayurveda
Happy life
Healthy person
The 8 Branches of Ayurveda
Similarity and Dissimilarity
*Substances
Supreme Self
“Paradi”- means of success in treatment13
Ayurveda that which deals with good, bad, happy and unhappy life, it’s promoters
and non-promoters, measurement and nature.
Su1#41
‘Ayus’: means conjunction of body , sense organs, mind and self
Su1#42
health: Health and disease have the same source; entities, which in suitable state,
generate person, cause various disorders in unsuitable state.
Su25#29
Disease is disequilibreum of the Dhatus. Health is equilibrium of Dhatus.
Health is known as happiness. Disease is known as unhappiness.
Su9#3
Two types of physicians:
1)promoters of vital breath and destroyers of
diseases.
2)promoters of diseases and
destroyers of vital breath.
Su29#5
Under a skilled physician, even extremely severe disorders can vanish quickly.
Under an ignorant physician, even the simplest disorders may aggravate.
Su9#14
Benefits of a disease-free condition: best source of virtue, wealth, gratification
and emancipation.
Disease destroys these same, welfare and life.
Su1#15-16
The 4 Vedas (ancient Indian texts): Rk [Rig], Sama, Yajus [Yajur], Atharva
Su30#20
Vaidyas are devoted to Atharva Veda, because: it has dealt with the subject of
medicine
[Su1#43], Su30#21
Categories of Medicine covered under the Atharva Veda:
Prescribing donation, propitiatory rites, offerings, auspicious rites,
oblations, observance of rules, expiations, fasting, incantations, etc.., and medicine for
promotion of life.
Su30#21
Definition of a person: he is an aggregate of sense organs, mind, and ‘objects’.
Su25#414
“Ayus”: (life)
has 3 synonyms;
“Cetananuvrtti”(continuance of consciousness)
“Jivita” (animation)
“Anubandha” (continuous flow)
“Dhari” (sustaining the body)
Su1#42, Su30#22
Definition of Ayurveda:
that which gets the Ayus (life) known (this is done by means of 1)
defining ‘Ayus’ (life), and by 2)describing it’s Types - happy and un-happy, beneficial
and non-beneficial, 3) it’s Measure, and 4) it’s Non-measure.)
that which imparts knowledge about the substances (including drugs)
alongwith their properties and actions as to their conduciveness or otherwise to life.
Su30#3
It (Ayurveda) is said as eternally continuing.
Su30#27
The Reasons for the Eternal Nature of Ayurveda:
Ayurveda is said as eternally continuing because of it’s beginning-less-
ness, because the characters of [it’s] entities are determined by universal nature and
because the characters of all substances are eternal.
There was never non-existence of the flow of life or intellect.
The knower of Ayurveda is also eternally continuing. [that is God/ the
soul/ the successful human vaidya will gain immortality]
“Pleasure (the state of health) and pain (the state of disease) along with
material factors, causes and symptoms, because of their inter-relations, are also eternal.
All these point towards the eternal continuity of Ayurveda.
Also, the 10 pairs of qualities and the Law of Similars and the Law of
Opposites (similar qualities increase each other; opposite qualities decrease each other)
are all eternal.
Thirdly, the 5 elements, and their properties are also eternal.
“Ayurveda never arose out of non-existence except understanding and
precepts;”
Some say it’s origin in view of these tow.
It’s natural characters are non-artificial as said here and in the first chapter
such as hotness of fire and liquidity of water.
It has also got the eternal continuity of natural characters of entities such
as increase in heavy substances, decrease in light substances by regular intake of the
heavy one.
-all the above is from Su30#2715
Definition of Happy Life:
The person is not afflicted with any somatic or psychic disorder,
is particularly youthful, capable with strength, energy, reputation,
manliness and prowess;
possessing knowledge, specific knowledge and strong sense organs and
sense objects; having immense wealth and various favorable enjoyments,
has achieved desired results of all actions and moves about where he likes.
Contrary to it is unhappy life
Su30#24
Characteristics of the healthy Person:
In early times, no undesirable consequence arose except from unrighteousness.
During the initial age (krtayaga), people were:
having prowess like the sons of gods,
exceedingly pure and with vast influence,
having perceived the gods, godly sages, virtue, religious sacrifices and
method of their performance;
with the body compact and stable like the essence of mountains,
and complexion and sense organs clear,
having strength, speed and valor like the wind,
with well-formed buttocks,
endowed with appropriate measure (size), physiognomy, cheerfulness and
corpulence,
were devoted to truthfulness, straightforwardness, un-cruelty, charity,
control of the senses, observance of rules, penance, fasting, celibacy and vows;
devoid of fear, attachment, aversion, confusion, greed, anger, grief,
conceit, illness, sleep, drowsiness, fatigue, exhaustion, lassitude and “
holding”,
and were having immeasurable life-span.
For those having exalted mind, qualities and actions the crops grew endowed
with inconceivable rasa, virya, vipaka, prabhava, and other properties due to presence of
all qualities in earth etc (the five elements?) In the beginning of Krtayuga.
Vi3#2416
Definition of Beneficial Life:
Person is well-wisher of all creatures,
abstains from taking other’s possession,
is truth-speaking, calm, taking steps after examining the situation,
free from carelessness,
observing the 3 categories (virtue, wealth and enjoyment) without their
mutual conflict,
worshiping the worthy persons,
devoted to knowledge, understanding and serenity of mind,
keeping company of the elderly persons,
controlled well the impulses of attachment, aversion, envy, intoxication
and conceit,
engaged in various types of gifts,
constantly devoted to penance, knowledge and peace,
having knowledge of and devotion to metaphysics,
keeping eye to both the worlds
and endowed with memory and intelligence.
Contrary is non-beneficial.
Su30#24
Definition of the Measure of Life:
Known by adventitious pathological symptoms in relation to objects,
sense organs, mind, intellect, movement, etc. such as one will die after a moment, hour,
or day; 3, 5, 7, 10 or 12 days, a fortnight, month, 6 months or a year. “Swabhava”
(becoming own self), “Pravrttyuparama” (cessation of activities). “Marana” (death),
“anityata” (non-eternity), nirodha (annihilation)- all are symptoms. This is the measure of
life. Contrary is non-measure which is described in the context of aristas (sudden
appearance of fatal signs). The measure of life is also described according to the body
constitution.
Su30#25
The Object of Ayurveda:
disorders in the diseased.
To protect health of the healthy and to alleviate the
Su1#24, Su30#26
Action: application of speech, mind, and body.
Su11#39
The object of therapy: Dhatusamya (equilibrium of sustaining and nourishing
factors) [balanced dhatus].
Su1353
Cause of disorders: perverted, negative and excessive use of time, intelligence
and sense objects.
Su1#54
Cause of pleasure: balanced use of the same.
Su1#5517
Body and mind; location of disorders and pleasures
Su1#55
Cause of Misery and Happiness:
Entire misery relating to both mind and body
depend on ignorance, the entire
happiness resides in pure knowledge
Su30#84
The sages once asked Punarvasu “What is the origin of a person, and what is the
origin of his diseases?”
– See Su25#3-31 in the original text for their discussion. This has not
been included in this text. A summary is as follows:
He answered: “Only the use of wholesome food promotes growth of the person.
And only the use of un-wholesome food is the cause of disorders.”
Su25#31
8 Branches of Ayurveda:
BranchEnglish translation
1) Kayacikitsamedicine
2) Salakyadealing with diseases of supra-clavicular
region
dealing with extraction of foreign bodies
3) Salyapahartrka
4) Visa-gara-vairodhika-prasamana
5) Bhuta vidyadealing with alleviation of poisons, artificial
poisons and toxic symptoms due to intake of
antagonistic substances
dealing with spirits or organisms
6) Kaumarabhrtyapediatrics
7) Rasayanapromotive measures
8) Vajikaranaaphrodisiacs
This whole chart: Su30#28
Similarity and disimilarity:
Similarity of all substances is always the cause of increase
and dissimilarity the cause of decrease.
Both effect by their application.
Su1#44
Similarity brings unity,
dissimilarity brings diversity.
Su1#45
“Similarity proposes similar purpose (or action)
while dissimilarity has opposite one.”18
Su1#45
a tripod on which the living world stands:
Mind, self and body-
these three make the tripod on which the living world
stands.
Su1#46
That (living body) is Purusa (person), sentient and location of this
is Ayurveda.
Su1#47
The Charaka gives a catalogue of all the (types of ) substances (dravyas):
The 5 elements: akasa, vayu, tejas, ap, prthvi)
Self
mind
time
space
Su1#48
The Charaka gives a catalogue of all the (types of ) Gunas:
Sense objects: sabda, sparsa, rupa, rasa, gandha
Properties: guru-laghu, sita-usna, snigdha=ruksa, manda-tiksna, slaksna-
khara, sandra-drava, mrdu-kathina, sthira-sara, suksma-sthula,
visada-picchila
Knowledge
Para-apara, yukti, sankhya, samyoga, vibhaga, prthaktva, parimana,
samskara, abhyasa
(These lists provided by P.V. Sharma.)
Su1#49
Definition of Sentient vs. Non-sentient beings:
Dravyas with sense organs are sentient while those without are not.
Su1#48
Definition of Karma:
Karma is movement initiated by effort.
(Or usually, just stated as “action”).
Su1#49
Substance (dravya):
that where actions and properties are located
The material cause of it’s the properties effect.
Su1#51
Property (guna):
related with inherence to substance.
Devoid of action
Is non-inherent cause of it’s effect
Su1#5119
Inherence (samavaya):
is the inseparableness of dravya (substances) with their gunas
(Properties);
no substance is devoid of property.
Su1#50
Action (Karma):
causative factor of conjunction and disjunction
located in substance
performance of that to be done
doesn’t require another factor
Su1#52
Supreme Self: it is devoid of abnormalities
it is eternal
it is seer of all actions
it is the cause of conjunction of consciousness with mind
it is the creator/ origin of the 5 elements (earth, water, fire, air,
space
it is the creator/ origin of the 5 sense organs (taste, touch etc.)
Su1#56
The following properties are known as “Paradi” (“Beginning with Para”). They
are the means of success in treatment:
paratva (excellence)
aparatva (non-excellence)-- These 2 are used in relation to place, time, age,
measure, vipaka, virya, rasa etc.
yukti (rationale)-- is the rational planning of therapeutic measures
sankhya (enumeration)-- is mathematics including statistics
samyoga (conjunction)-- is the joining together of entities. It is of three types
according to the active participation of both, all or only one partner. It is non-eternal.
[this last statement is a profound philosophical one; no union is permanent, but rather
only temporary. All entities are made of the temporary bonding of other entities. All
living creatures are only the temporary union of the foods they have eaten, and will
eventually disperse to become the foods of a different union or creature.] [Samyoga also
refers to conjunction of herbs into formulas, of doshas and dhatus into disease, of
multiple etiologies into single etiology, etc.]
vibhaga (disjunction)-- it is also of 3 types; vibhakti (excision), viyoga
(disjoining) and bhagaso graha (division).
prthaktva (separateness) – is of 3 types; asamyoga (spatial separateness),
vailaksanya (class separateness) and anekata (individual separateness).
parimana (measurement)-- denotes measures (of all types- including weights).
samskara (processing)-- this is processing
abhyasa (practice)–is regular use of substance, habituation and practice.
–Thus all the paradi properties are said with their definitions, which if
unknown, do not let the therapy proceed properly.
Su26#29-3520
Gunas (the 10 Pairs of Qualities):
Definition of Guna (quality):
Guna (quality) is the property of a substance.
Su1#50
[All substances have qualities.] [In reality, all substances will have several qualities.]
[By substance, it means food, herbs, weather, music, people, disease symptoms, etc.]
[The beauty of this system is that everything in life may be viewed on the same radar
screen, as it were, so that cause and effect is easy to see and treatment may be achieved
with any substance, so long as it is opposite to the quality of the aggravated substances
or pathology. (See General Treatment chapter for more details).]
The 20 Gunas (qualities):
there are 10 pairs of opposite qualities, to which all substances belong:
The Sanskrit Terms for the Same:
The 10 Pairs:
hot-cold
Guru-laghu
heavy-light
Sita-usna
liquid-dense
Snigdha-ruksa
rough-slimy
Manda-tiksna
oily-dry
Slaksna-khara
stable-mobile
Sandra-drava
subtle-gross
Mrdu-khatina
cloudy-clear
Sthira-sara
soft-hard
Suksma-sthula
sharp-dull
Visada-picchila
Su1#49, and credit to P.V. Sharma, p.7,
book I
The following slight variations from the above list have also been used:
rough-unctuous
non-slimy-slimy
smooth-coarse
minute-gross
viscous-liquid
Su25#36
Rule governing opposing Gunas: When the contraries meet together, the stronger one
subdues the weaker one.
Vi1#1421
Mahabhutas (5 Elements):
Definition of the mahabhutas (“great elements”):
There are five elements
prthvi (earth), ap or soma (water), agni (fire), vayu (air), akasha (space)
Su1#56
Relation of the 5 Elements to the 5 Senses:
Each of the 5 elements is a medium for one of the 5 senses.
The sanskrit names for the 5 senses are: gandha (smell), rasa (taste), rupa (vision/
appearance), sparsa (touch) and sabda (sound).
Su1#56
The 5 elements are related to the 5 senses as follows:
Earth- smell
Water- taste
Fire- sight
Air- touch
Space- sound
Su1#5622
The 6 Rasas (tastes):
General Information on Tastes
Cause of Variation of Tastes in Nature
Number of combinations of tastes
Actions of the tastes
Chart of the 6 tastes- benefits and demerits
Effect of tastes according to predominant element
Tastes which aggravate and pacify the doshas- chart
The 4 stages of taste
Rasa and Vipaka
Rasa
Rasa and Virya
Prabhava
Chart- dominant qualities of the tastes
Effect of drugs according to predominant element23
The Number of Tastes: 6
The 6 Tastes:
Sweet (madhura), sour (amla), salty (lavana), pungent (katu), bitter (tikta),
astringent (kasaya)
Su26#9
About the 6 Tastes:
They are present in all substances [every substance will contain at least a
little of each of the 6 tastes]
-Su1#65
But they are present in varying quantity from one substance to another [so
sour taste is more present in lemons, for example, while pungent taste is more present in
chili peppers.]
-Su1#65
“They are effected by varying ratios of the elements.” As you will see
below, each taste is made up of 2 elements. When these elements are combined in
different ratios, the nature of the taste changes. This may be either an obvious or a
subtle difference.
Su1#65
Rasa [tastes in general] is made of ap (water) and prthvi (earth). Differentiation is
due to relative amounts of the other 3 elements.
[The editor’s interpretation here is that: tastes in general are made of water
and earth. What gives the taste of every substance it’s individuality is the variation of the
other 3 elements (fire, air and space).]
Su1#64
‘Ap’ (water element) has the property of the sense of rasa (taste). -Su1#56
The primordial source of taste is water.
Su26#9
Rasa (taste) is the object of ‘Rasana’ (‘taste’).
Su1#64
Generation of Different Rasas (Tastes):
Water is predominantly composed of ‘soma’ (‘ap’) (water element).
It is generated in sky [as rain].
It is naturally cold, light and having un-manifested rasas [it has no
perceivable taste].
This water, while falling from the sky, gets endowed with the properties of
5 elements.
When this water has dropped to the ground, it nourishes the physical
forms of animals and plants.
In these [the animals and plants] the 6 rasas (tastes) are developed.
-this sutra: Su26#3924
Cause of variation of elements (and thus the diffferent character) in the tastes:
Proportional variation of the 5 elements in the tastes of various substances
is possible due to the change of
seasons.
Each season is predominant in a different quality or element.
For example, plants grown in the late summer will have more fire element,
and thus more pungent taste. Plants grown in the spring will have more water element
and thus more sweet taste.
-this sutra: Su26#40
It is also due to various complexions and shapes in plants and animals.
Su26#40
The Reason Why the Number of Tastes is Only 6, and Not Innumerable:
The variations of substances coming together to form other substances
with unique tastes is innumerable, but the 6 categories of tastes are limited because they
are formed only by the 5 elements.
Su26#9
[consider putting the following in semi-chart form (see “number of combinations of
doshas” for structure model)]
There are 63 types of variations of rasas according to substance, place and time,
that is mentioned below:
By combination of 2 rasas (i.e., madhura + amla) there are 15 [options/
variations]
Likewise, by combination of the 3 rasas together, there are 20
‘substances’.
“By combination of 4 rasas together there are 15 substances such as sweet
and sour get combined separately with 2 of the remaining rasas, likewise sweet and
saline, and sweet and pungent with 2 of the remaining rasas.”
Sour and saline with the remaining 2 rasas; sour and pungent, and
saline and pungent have also similar combinations.
5 rasas combined together make 6 [options].
Single rasas separately make 6.
6 rasas combined together make 1 [option].
Thus according to various combinations of rasas the types of
substances comes to 63.
Su26#14-22
The number 63 becomes innumerable considering the rasas and anurasas because
rasas (themselves) transgress the number on account of their relative degrees. [In other
words, there is innumerable subtle shades of difference in proportion of the 6 tastes from
one substance to another, so the total number of tastes of all substances is innumerable.]
Su26#24
Properties are not said as located in properties (themselves).
Hence a physician should take the properties of rasas as those of dravyas, (taking
into account) the different intentions of the author.
Su26#3625
Taste Vs. Substance:
It is important to understand the picture in terms of the effect of rasa (taste)
(individual) and dravya (substance) (total) on one side and dosa (individual) and disease
(total) on the other.
Vi1#12
The 2 Categories of Action of Rasas (Tastes):
1) elimination
2) pacification
Su26#9
Palatability Depends Upon the Person Tasting:
Palatability or Unpalatability of a taste is subjective according to the
patient doing the tasting.
Su26#9
The 2 [Effects] of Rasas (Tastes):
1) Wholesome
2) Un-wholesome
Su26#9
The Tastes maintain the body if used properly; otherwise they vitiate the doshas.
Vi1#4
Relation of the 5 Elements to the 6 Tastes:
“The elements are actually the sub-stratum of the rasas (tastes).”
Su26#9
The Cause of Variation of Proportion of the 5 Elements in Each Taste and Each
Substance:
Their proportion depends on natural composition, products, preparation,
place [climate] and time [season, time of day, life-cycle of the plant/ animal being used].
Su26#9
Relation of the 10 Pairs of Qualities to the Tastes:
The qualities “are the properties residing in those sub-strata known as
dravya (substance or drug).”
Su26#926
Chart of the Rasas (Tastes) and their Benefits and Demerits:
taste
element uses
demerits (if used singly or
extensively)
madhura water
because of it’s suitability to the body, Produces kaphaja disorders
such as obesity, laxity,
promotes all dhatus, ojas, sukra; is
(sweet)
[Note:
lassitude, over-sleep, heaviness,
conducive to life-span, pleasing t six
only
anorexia, mildness of appetite,
water is sense organs, promotes strength and
abnormal growth in mouth and
listed
lustre, alleviates pitta, poisons and
throat, dyspnoea, cough, coryza,
here;
vayu; pacifies thirst and heat; is
alasaka, fever with shivering,
not
beneficial for skin hairs, throat and
hardness of bowels, sweetness
earth!] strength; is nourishing, vitalizer,
in mouth, vomiting, loss of
saturating, bulk-promoting, and
stabilizer; promotes healing in wounds consciousness and voice, goitre,
f the emaciated, is delighting for nose, cervical adenitis, filariasis,
pharyngitis, (mucous) coating in
Su26#4 mouth, throat, lips and tongue;
bladder, arteries and throat, eye
alleviates fainting, is most liked by
0
diseases, conjunctivitis, etc.
bees and ants, is unctuous, cold and
heavy. -Su26#43.1
Su26#43.1
Again: it is known by it’s actions:
unction, saturation, exhilaration and
softening. While in mouth it pervades
and as if makes a coating there.
-Su26#73-79
gives rise to relish for food, stimulates Sensitizes teeth, causes thirst,
Amla
earth
makes the eye close, raises the
agni, promotes the bulk of the body
(sour)
fire
and gives energy to it, awakens mind, body hairs, liquefies Kapha,
makes the sense organs firm, promotes aggravates Pitta, affects blood
strength, carminates wind, saturates
morbidity, causes heat in
muscles and laxity in body,
heart, salivates mouth; carries down,
produces swelling in wasted,
moistens and digests food; gives
injured, emaciated and
satisfaction, and is light, hot and
debilitated persons, because of
unctuous. -Su26#43.2
Again: known by sensitization of
it’s fire nature causes
teeth, salivation, sweating, awakening suppuration in wounds, injuries,
bites, burns, fractures,
of mouth (gustatory sensations), and
burning in mouth and throat
swellings, falling, poisoned
Su26#73-79
spots due to urination and
contact of insects, compressed,
Su26#4
excised, dislocated, punctured
and crushed etc.; and causes
0
burning sensation in throat,
chest and cardiac region.
-Su26#43.227
Lavana
(salty)
Fire
water
Su26#4
0
is digestive, moistening, appetiser,
pouring, expectorant, mass-breaking,
irritant, laxative, depressant, oozing,
space-creating, vata-alleviating,
removes stiffness, binding and
compactness, overshadows all the
rasas, salivates mouth, liquefies kapha,
cleanses channels, softens all the
body0parts, gives relish to food, is an
associate of food. It is not much
heavy, unctuous and hot. (So, it is
unctuous and hot). -Su26#43.3
Again: known by- dissolved quickly
and produces moistening, watering,
softening and burning in mouth.
-Su26#73-79
Qualities: hot, sharp, not so heavy
unctuous, moistening,
laxitive, relishing
Uses: promoting relish,
digestion, moistening, and purgation
Vi1#18
Katuka
Pungent
fire
air
Su26#4
0
cleanses mouth, stimulates digestion,
absorbs food, causes secretion from
the nose and eyes; makes the sense
organs clear, alleviates alasaka,
swelling, corpulence, urticarial
patches, channel-blocking, unction,
sweating, moisture and dirts, gives
relish to food, destroys itching,
depresses wounds, kills organisms,
scrapes muscles, checks the
coagulation of blood, cuts the
bindings, opens the channels, pacifies
Kapha, and is light, hot and rough.
-Su26#43.4
Again: on contact irritates and
produces piercing pain in tongue and
stimulates secretions with burning
from mouth, nose and eyes .
-Su26#73-79
Vitiates Pitta, aggravates rakta,
causes thirst, fainting, heat,
tearing, sloughing, increases
leprosy and other skin diseases,
aggravates poisons, makes the
inflamed part burst and teeth
fall down; damages potency,
hinders sense organs, gives rise
to wrinkles, gray hair, and
baldness; produces disorders
like internal hemorrhage, acid
gastritis, erysipelas, vatarakta,
eczema, alopecia, etc.
-Su26#43.3
In Excess: causes accumulation
of the doshas, malaise, laxity
and debility, baldness, graying
of hairs, wrinkles.
City people who
use it continuously are
exceedingly depressed, with
loose muscles and blood ,
unable to bear pain .
Even the people who are suited
to excess use of salt fall victim
to untimely baldness, greying
hairs and wrinkles. Vi1#18
Damages sexual potency due to
the effect of vipaka, causes
mental confusion, malaise,
depression, emaciation, fainting,
bending, feeling of darkness,
giddiness, burning in throat,
body-heat, loss of strength and
thirst due to the effects of rasa,
virya and prabhava, over and
above, due to abundance of
vayu and agni, it produces
vatika disorders in feet, hands,
sides, back, etc. particularly
with symptoms like movements,
burning pain, tremors, piercing
and tearing pains.
-Su26#43.428
Tikta
(bitter)
space
air
Su26#4
0
Kasaya
air
(astringe earth
nt)
Su26#4
0
Ksara
(Alkali):
(This is
not one
of the 6
tastes)
though itself is non-relishing, destroys
disrelish, is antipoison, anthelmintic,
alleviates fainting, burning sensation,
itching, leprosy (including skin
disorders) and thirst; provides
firmness to skin and muscles, is
antipyretic, appetiser, digestive,
galacto-depurant, reducing, absorbent
of moisture, fat, muscle0fat, marrow,
lymph, pus, sweat, urine, faeces, pitta
and kapha; and is rough, cold, and
light.
-Su26#43.5
Again: known by- on contact with
tongue, destroys all other gustatory
perceptions so that no other taste is
perceived; gives rise to non-sliminess
and dryness in mouth, alongwith
cheerfulness. -Su26#73-79
is pacifying, astringent, union-
promoting, compressing, healing,
absorbing, checking (of discharges);
pacifies kapha, rakta and pitta; utilizes
the body fluid, is rough, cold and
slightly light. -Su26#43.6
Again: known by- produces non-
sliminess, stiffness and coldness in
tongue, as if choking the throat and is
also a “depressant”-[What does that
mean?].
-Su26#73-79
On account of it’s roughness,
coarseness and non-sliminess,
dries up all the dhatus; causes
coarseness in channels, takes
away strength, produces
emaciation, malaise, mental
confusion, giddiness, dryness of
mouth and other vatika
disorders.
-Su26#43.5
Dries up mouth, causes heart-
ache, flatulence, hindrance in
voice, slowing of movement in
channels, blackishness,
impotency, gas formation
during digestion; checks flatus,
urine, faeces and semen;
produces emaciation, malaise,
thirst, stiffness; and, because of
its coarseness, non-sliminess
and roughness, causes Vatika
disorders like hemiplegia,
spasm, convulsions, facial
paralysis etc.. -Su26#43.6
In excess: damages
Actions; digestion, burning and tearing
hairs, eyes, heart, and virility
Qualities: hot, sharp, light
At first moistens but later dries
up
‘Ksara’ is so-called because of
‘Ksarana’ (‘having been poured out’).
It is not a rasa (taste) but a dravya
(substance), because it has been
derived from many substances, having
many rasas (tastes) (but predominantly
pungent and salty), with many sense
objects and produced by a particular
method of preparation.
-Su26#929
Movement of drugs relative to Element:
Predominant Element:
Direction Tendency:
Rasas with vayu and Agnimove upwards
Rasas with Ap and prthvioften move downwards
Those having mixed
constitutionsmove both ways
Reason:
because of lightness, rushing
up of vayu and flaming up of
agni
due to heaviness of prthvi
and downward moving
tendency of water.
Su26#41
Rasas maintain the body if used properly, otherwise they vitiate the doshas.
Vi1#4
In case of “conjunction of RASAS and DOSHAS”, the rasas aggravate those
dosas to which they are similar or mostly similar in properties and pacify by regular use
those to which they are contrary or mostly contrary in properties.
“Because of this system, rasas individually are said as 6 and doshas as 3.”
[* Is this the origin of the number of doshas being 3? *]
Vi1#7
These rasas (tastes), when used in proper quantity, are beneficial for the living
beings.
When used in improper quantities they become harmful.
Su26#44.
Dosha:Tastes which Aggravate or Pacify the Respective Doshas:
Aggravating Tastes:
Pacifying Tastes:
Vatapungent, bitter, astringentsweet, sour, salty
Pittasour, salty, pungentsweet, bitter, astringent
Kaphasweet, sour, saltypungent, bitter, astringent
Su1#66,
Vi1#6
Stage:
4 stages of taste’s effect on a person:
Definition:
Indicating Options:
Relative Strength:
Rasa:initial taste-effectOptions are the 6 tastes[1+]
Virya:effect of substance
on the person while
its’ being digested
-Su26#66Options are light-heavy,
cold-hot, and ...-...,
something–something
-Su26#64It overpowers Rasa and
Vipaka
[3+] -Su26#7230
Vipaka:
Prabhav:
effect/ taste of
Options are the 6 tastes.
substance as it is
being excreted from
colon, etc.. -Su26#66
unknown cause
May be tastes or qualities
-Su26#66
-Su26#66
It overpowers Rasa
[2+]
-Su26#72
It’s effect overpowers all of
the other taste stages.
[4+]
-Su26#72
Relation of Rasa and Vipaka:
If the RASA of substance is:The VIPAKA may be:
Sweet or SaltySweet
SourSour
Pungent, Bitter or AstringentPungent
Su26#57-58
Examples of Variations in Actions of Rasa [(Initial Taste Effect)]:
Amla (sour) rasa that is purgative:
The herb amalaka is sour and purgative.
(Sour taste is normally purgative.)
Amla (sour) rasa that is astringent:
The herb “kapittha” has sour rasa but is astringent (it is anti-
purgative).
Katu (pungent) rasa that is aphrodisiac:
The herbs pippali and sunthi (fresh ginger) are both aphrodisiac.
(Pungent taste is normally anti-aphrodisiac.)
Kasaya (astringent) rasa (taste) that is laxative and hot:
The herb haritaki is laxative and hot.
(Astringent taste is normally anti-laxative and cold.)
Su26#50-52
Relation of Rasa to Virya:
If the RASA of substance is:The VIRYA may be:
Sweet, bitter, Astringentcool
Sour, Salty, Pungenthot
Sweet, [sour, astringentheavy
[salty], pungent, bitterlight
Madhura in rasa +vipaka:cold in Virya
Amla/katuka in rasa + vipaka:hot in virya
[the following is slight difference from above info]31
‘Here are the verses–
The substance (drug or diet) which is madhura in rasa and vipaka
(biotransformation) is sita (cold) in virya (potency).
Likewise, the substance, amla in rasa and vipaka, or katuka in the same, is usna
(hot) in virya.
Su26#45
When virya and Vipaka are in conformity with rasa, properties are known by rasa.
Examples:
Milk and ghee both have madhura sweet rasa, and they have sita
(cool) virya.
The herbs cavya and citraka both have katu (pungent) rasa, and
they have usna (hot) virya.
Su26#46-47
Rasa:
Definition/ Zone of Influence of Rasa:
Rasa is perceived mostly in the dry and fresh stages of a substance.
Rasa is perceived mostly at the beginning and end of the gustatory (taste/
digestion) process.
Anurasa (subsidiary taste):
Anurasa is the substance’s subsidiary [secondary] taste, as opposed to it’s rasa,
primary taste.
The anurasa is unmanifested in the above 4 stages or instances.
[so it will be manifested (noticed) in the middle of the gustatory process.
Su26#28
Note: “Ksara” ([alkali]) is so called because of “skarana” (having been poured
out). It is not a rasa but a dravya (substance) having been derived from many substances,
having many rasas, but is predominantly pungent and salty, with many sense objects and
produces by a particular method of preparation.
Su26#9
Virya (potency): that which is responsible for each and every action. The
substance can exert no action in absence of virya. All actions are exerted due to Virya. -32
Su26#65
Rasa: is known by it’s contact with the body (particularly tongue). -Su26#66
Vipaka is known by observing final effect on body. -Su26#66
Virya is known by the action exerted during the period from administration till
excretion of the drug.
Su26#66
Detail on Virya/ Options for Virya/ Opinions on Virya:
Some hold that there is 8-fold Virya: mrdu (soft), tiksna (sharp), guru (heavy),
laghu (light), snigdha (unctuous), ruksa (rough), usna (hot) and sita (cold).
Others believe that there are only 2 viryas: sita (cold) and usna (hot).
Su26#64
Vipaka:
madhura, lavana and amla: due to unctuousness, are often conducive to
elimination of wind, urine and feces. -Su26#59
Katu, tikta, and kasaya: due to roughness, create hindrance in elimination of wind,
faeces, urine and semen.
-Su26#60
Katu vipaka: damages semen, obstructs (elimination of ) feces and urine and
aggravates vata.
-Su26#61
Madhura vipaka: helps elimination of feces and urine and n creases kapha and
semen
-Su26#61
Amla vipaka: aggravates pitata, helps elimination o feces and urine and damages
semen
-Su26#62
Among the vipakas, madhura vipaka is heavy and the other two (pungent and
sour) are light. -Su26#62
According to variation in gunas (properties) [/elements], there is also variation in
degrees of vipakas energetic effect. -su26#63
Prabhava:
Definition of “Prabhava”:33
In cases, where, in spite of similarity in rasa, virya and vipaka, there is difference
in action, this difference is said to be due to prabhava (specific potency).
Su26#67
“Their prabhava is unthinkable”; not reducable.
Su26#68-70
Examples of prabhava (specific potency):
The herb citrak is: katu rasa, vipaka, but usna virya
The herb danti is: same rasa, virya, vipaka as citraka, but it is purgative
“poison: acts as antidote to poison”
action of “urdhwabhagahara” (emetics) and “anulomika” (purgatives) is prabhava
various actions of wearable gems is also prabhava.
Su26#68-70 (above 6 lines)
Exceptions to the Rasa, Virya, Vipaka generalizations:
Substances with madhura (sweet), kasaya (astringent), and tikta (bitter)
rasa, but usna (hot)virya: brihat pancha mulas (‘the Large 5 roots’), meat of marshy and
aquatic animals
Substances with salty rasa but cool virya: rock salt
Substance with sour rasa but cool virya: amalaki
Substances with bitter rasa, but hot virya: arka, aguru, gudduci.
(These are just a few examples.)
Su26#48-49
Qualities of the Tastes
quality
greatest (“highest
degree”)
[Note: perhaps
explain this
graduation system
used here.]
roughness
kasaya
greatergreat
[But not ‘least’]
katutikta
hotnesslavanaamlakatu
unctuousnessmadhuraamlalavana*
coldnessmadhurakasayatikta
heavinessmadhurakasayalavana*
lightnesstiktakatu
amla
note: some take
lavana in this position
also.
Su26#53-56
*Thus Lavana (salty) is placed in the lowest order considering both heaviness and
lightness. -Su26#26-56
[In other words, salty taste is not very heavy and it is not very light; it’s just in the
middle/ neutral relative to this quality.]34
Properties of Drugs [(Vs. Tastes), if it makes a difference] Relative to Element
make-up:
predominant Element of drug resultant predominant
resultant effects of drug
properties of drug
earth
heavy, coarse, hard, dull,
development, compactness,
stable, non-slimy, solid,
heaviness, firmness
gross, and smell
water
liquid, unctuous, cold, dull,
moistening, unction, binding,
soft, slimy and taste
oozing, softening,
exhilaration
fire
hot, sharp, minute, light,
heat, digestion, lustre, light,
rough, non-slimy, and vision complexion
Air
light, cold, rough, coarse,
roughness, depression
non-slimy, minute, and touch [(reduction)], movement, non-
sliminess, lightness
space
soft, light, minute, smooth
softening, hollowing,
and sound
lightness
This whole chart- Su26#11
Knowledge of Tastes relative to the Doshas:
One who is conversant with the variations of rasas vis avis those of dosas,
does not confuse in deciding the cause, symptoms and treatment of diseases.
Su26#2735
The 3 Doshas (Body Humors):
Definition
Origins of doshas
Body constitution
The 3 mind/ psychic humors
Diminished vs. aggravated doshas
Seasonal variations
Doshic combinations
Detail on Vata
Detail on Pitta
Detail on Kapha36
Doshas are the Agents of all Diseases:
The multiple groups of disorders in the body are never independent of P, K and V.
[No matter how complex the situation of disease is, it never transgresses the 3
causative factors, P, K and V.]
Only exogenous disorders are different from them.
Su20#6
The 3 Body doshas: Vata, Pitta, and Kapha
Su1#57
Definition of the doshas: the three body energetics, made of qualities, which
support right body function in right amount, and destroy right body function in excess or
deficiency.
“Factors responsible for physiological functions but capable of causing disorders”
Su1#57 (This definition given by P.V. Sharma)
Vata, Pitta and Kapha are eternally present in the body of living beings either as
normal or abnormal. The wise person should know them.
Su18#48
[Origin] of Doshas in the Body:
(During the process of conversion in the body of food into successive dhatus) rasa
known as the clear essence of food and the excretion known as the waste products are
produced. The excretion nourishes sweat, urine, feces, V, P and K; as well as other
body secretions.
[So, this is where V, P and K come from! This is their {primary} source.]
Su28#4
The waste products produced from the digestion of food “nourish” (generate)
sweat, urine, feces as well as the 3 doshas, V, P and K.
Su28#4
All V, P and K, in normal state, endow the person with unaffected sense
organs, strength and complexion and happiness and also with a long life-span as virtue,
wealth and enjoyment pursued properly endow the person with great well-being here and
in the world hereafter;
on the contrary, in abnormal state, they give rise to severe abnormalities as 3
seasons, when abnormal, produce harmful effects in the world particularly at the time of
final destruction.
Su12#13
Discussion About Prakruti and the Doshas:
“Some say– ‘there are no persons having all the 3 doshas in equilibrium because of the
use of unbalanced food, thus some are having Vata constitution, some Pitta constitution
and others Kapha constitution.’ This statement not correct. Why? Because the
physicians take the person having balanced V, P and K as healthy, health is normalcy and
for the same object therapeutic measures are applied. Hence there are (person having
prakrti as) balanced V, P and K but there are no prakrtis (constitution) like V, P or K.
Because of predominance of certain dosha in person the respective dosha prakrti of the37
same is said, but as there can’t be normalcy in imbalanced doshas they can’t be taken as
prakrti. The concerned person can only be said as Vatika, Paittika or Kaphaja because
they are in the state of abnormalcy.”
[This is an important discussion, though it takes some careful study.]
Vi6#13
“3 Types of People are considered to be diseased by Atreya and his followers,
though physicians from other schools consider these people to be within normal health.
They are: Vatala, Pitala and Slesmala (people of V, P or K constitution
{imbalance}).
Vi6#14
“Vatala, Pittala and Slesmala persons are often susceptible to vattala, pittala and
slesmala disorders respectively and these disorders are of severe nature.
Vi6#15
Definition of Body Constitution:
From the very time of conception, some persons are having equilibrium of P, V
and K while others are seen vatala, pittala or slesmala (having predominance of V or P or
K). [[This will be seen as the doshas filling the srotas, not as a V body frame, a P body
frame or a K body frame.]]
Amongst them, those in the first category are disease free while others (vatala
etc.) are always ill. Ever attachment of a particular dosha is known as body constitution.
Su7#39-40
[The above should be kept as one piece; it is a very important
understanding!]
Body constitution: ever attachment of a particular dosha.
Su7#40
Vikruti: is vikara (disorder) or pathological manifestation. -Vi8#101
The disorder should be examined in terms of strength of cause, dosha,
dusya, constitution, place, time and also by symptoms, because the severity of the disease
can not be known without knowing these factors.
Vi8#101
Treatment of body doshas: with remedial measures of divine and rational
nature
Su1#58
Cause of Determination of Prakrti ([“birth”] constitution):
The body of the fetus is determined by:
The constitution of Sperm and Ovum
The influence of time [season of conception, of development and
of birth]38
The state of the uterus (before and during pregnancy)
The diet and behavior of the mother (before and during pregnancy)
That of the product of mahabhutas [look up the intent of this line in
sutra.]
The dosa, one or more, which predominates in these factors, gets attached
to the foetus, and is known as “dosaprakrti” (physical or dosika constitution)
This whole paragraph- Vi8#95
Hence, some persons are constitutionally slesmala (having predominance of slesma),
some are pittala and some are vattala, some have combined dosas and some have
balanced “dhatus”.
Vi8#95
[Note the use of the word ‘dhatus’ here. It has been used in other similar
statements, so I believe it IS the intended word.]
The 3 Mind Doshas: Rajas, Sattva, and Tamas
- Su1#57
(Rajas and Tamas have been listed as the only 2 mental doshas in
one place in the Charaka.) [This would make sense, as Sattva could be considered to be
related to Rajas and Tamas as the Dhatus are related to the V, P and K; Sattva is the
perfect essence of undisturbed, empty mind, just as the dhatus are the essence of perfect
body.]
Tamas: inertia, dullness, sleep, darkness
Rajas: momentum, desire, action
Sattva: peaceful, clear, balanced, steady
with knowledge, specific knowledge,
Treatment of mind doshas:
restraint, memory and concentration
Su1#58
Relation of Mental/ Emotional and Physical Diseases:
“These diseases sometimes continuing together are associated mutually
such as passion etc. being associated with / congruent with fever etc.”
Vi6#8
Qualities of Vata:
non-unctuous, cold, light, subtle, mobile, non-slimy and rough.
Su1#59
Qualities of Pitta:
slightly unctuous, hot, sharp, liquid, sour, mobile and pungent.
Su1#60
Qualities of Kapha:
heavy, cold, soft, unctuousness, sweet, immobile, slimy.
Su1#60
[Note: the above 3 entries have just been entered under V, P, and K sections, but
keep them here also.]
“Due to combination of doshas, characters are found accordingly.”
Vi8#9939
“In persons having equilibrium of all doshas, the character of them are found.”
Vi8#100
The 3 body doshas and the 2 mind doshas, when vitiated, produce innumerable
different disorders due to different vitiating factors and dusya (affected entities).
Vi6#7
The three triple movements of the Doshas:
Diminution, Normalcy, and aggravation
upward, downward, and oblique
vement in the Belly, Extremities, and Vital organs+joints
Su17#112-113
Beneficial and Detrimental Effects of the Doshas:
Again, movement [action] of doshas is of 2 types– normal and abnormal. For
instance, P having the nature of heat, is responsible for digestion in living beings but
when vitiated it causes many disorders. K, in normal state, is responsible for strength but
when abnormal becomes excretion [ama/ wastes/ mucus]. In other words, the normal K
is said as ojas [and solid tissues] while the abnormal one is sinful (cause of various
disorders). Likewise, all the movements are due to normal V and it is taken as life breath
of the living beings but in abnormal state it produces disorders even obstructing the life
breath.
Su17#115-118
How to Diagnose Diminished or Increased Doshas:
The diminution of V, P and K is known by deficiency in normal function or
increase in opposite actions.
-Su18#52
The aggravation of dosas is known invariably by the increase in their normal
functions.
Su18#53
Seasonal Influence on the Doshas:
Accumulation, vitiation and pacification of P, K and V occurs in seasons of rains
etc. respectively, “Thus CONDITIONING is natural by the effect of the seasonal
changes.”
Su17#114
P is accumulated, vitiated and pacified in rainy season autumn and early
rains, respectively.
K is accumulated, vitiated and pacified in early winter, spring and summer
respectively.
V is accumulated, vitiated and pacified in summer, rainy seasons and
autumn, respectively.
-credit: footnote to Su17#114, by P.V. Sharma, p.124, Vol I40
Enumeration of Combinations of Doshas:
Total number of combinations of doshic Aggravation and Diminution is 50 types:
Total combinations of Doshic aggravations is 25 types:
Total combinations of Tri-doshic aggravation is 13 types:
two doshas dominating: 3
one dosha dominating: 3
doshas in diminished, moderate and dominant conditions: 6
equal aggravations of all doshas: 1
Total combination of Dual-doshic aggravated dosas is of 9 types:
dominant aggravation of one dosha: 6
aggravation of both doshas equally: 3
Total combinations of Single-doshic aggravation is of 3 types:
aggravation of one dosha: 3
The total combinations of Doshic Diminution is also 25 types.
Conditions of taking aggravation and diminution of doshas together come to 12:
(a) one aggravated, one normal, one diminished = 6 types
(b) two aggravated, one diminished = 3 types
(c) one aggravated, two diminished = 3 types
–Thus doshas can combine together in various proportions which come to the
total number of 62 as explained above”.
Su17#41-44
– here follows in the book a section on signs of doshas covering and diminished,
which has already been added. Perhaps put the above numeration [put into a chart
format] next to this chart on doshas covering and diminished.--
Vata
Qualities: (6): roughness, lightness, coldness, hardness, coarseness, non-
sliminess (and hollow) -Su12#4
It is formless and unstable. -Su12#3
It is non-unctuous, cold, light, subtle, mobile, non-slimy and rough. -41
Su1#59
Normal functions in Nature: holding up the earth, kindling of fire, disposing
continuous movement of the sun, moon and groups of stars and planets, making
of clouds, raining waters, initiation of streams, producing flowers and fruits,
sprouting of plants, demarcation of seasons, division of dhatus, manifesting of
measure and shape of dhatus, strengthening of seeds, growth of plants, removing
excessive moisture, absorbing and normal transformation.
Su12#8
Adverse (when vitiated) effects in Nature: churning the tops of mountains,
churning of trees, producing high tides in oceans, overflowing of the lakes, counter-
current in rivers, earthquake, moving of clouds with sound, showering of dew, thunder,
dust, sand, fish, frog, snake, alkali, blood, stone and thunderstorm; derangement of six
seasons, non-compactness of crops, complications in creatures, replacing the positive
factors with negative ones, and release of clouds, sun, fire and wind which bring about
the end of four ages.
“Vayu is all powerful, producer and indestructible; causes negation of the
positive factors in creatures and brings about happiness and misery; he is Death, Yama
(god of death), regulator, Prajapati (master of creatures), Aditi, Viswa, karma
(performing all sorts of functions), taking all sorts of forms, penetrates into all, executes
all the systems, is most subtle, pervasive, Visnu (protector), moves in the entire nature,
what else Vayu himself is the Lord (all powerful).”
Su12#8
Normal functions in the body: enthusiasm, inspiration, expiration, movements,
normal processing of dhatus, and normal elimination if excreta. -Su18#49
Holds up the systems and organs, initiates upward and downward movements,
leads and controls the mind, employs all sense organs in their activity, carries all sense
objects, causes structural formation of all bodily dhatus, promotes union in the body,
prompts speech, originates touch and sound, is the root of auditory and tactile sense
organs, is source of exhiliration and courage, stimulated agni, absorbs dosas, throws out
excreta, makes the gross and subtle channels, shapes the foetus and maintains life-span.
Su12#8
V has 5 forms, or sectors in the body: Prana, Udana, Samana, Vyana and Apana
Su12#8
Characteristics in vitiation: roughness, coldness, lightness, non-sliminess,
motion, formlessness, and instability. Producing these actions: separation, dislocation,
division, attachment, tearing malaise, exhilaration, thirst, tremors, circumvention,
looseness, piercing pain, pain , movement, etc.. Also coarseness, roughness, non-
sliminess, porousness, reddish lustre, astringent taste, tastelessness, wasting, pain,
numbness, contraction, stiffness, limping, etc.. -Su20#12
Also: affects strength, complexion, happiness and life span; agitates mind, affects
all the sense organs, destroys, deforms or detains the embryo for long, produces
fear, grief, confusion, anxiety and excessive delirium and (at the end) stops the
vital breath.42
Etiology of V’s vitiation in the dhatus:
Prolonged use of measures having similar qualities (to V).
Su12#5
Note: these measures/ substances need not come in direct contact with V
in the dhatus to increase/ vitiate it.
Su12#3
How V Gets Vitiated (Increased):
Now will be explained how the factors which vitiate or pacify V can do so
without coming into contact with the formless and unstable V.
The V-vitiating factors produce roughness, lightness, coldness, hardness,
coarseness, non-sliminess and hollowness in the body parts and V finding favorable
environment there gets located in those body parts and because of nourishment
[further increase of V-vitiating qualities in the body] gets vitiated.
On the contrary, the V-pacifying factors produce unctuousness, heaviness,
hotness, smoothness, softness, sliminess and solidity. Thus V moving in such body parts
finds no location and as such gets pacified.
Su12#7
[The above is Very Important! Sutra]
Location in the body: urinary tract, colon, waist, legs, feet, bones, and
especially the intestines
Su20#8
Sub-Divisions of Vata
V has 5 forms or sectors: prana, udana, samana, vyana and apana.
Su12#8
[more information in sub-vatas was written in the ‘Vatavyadhi’ chapter,
and has been already included under in this book 1 under diagnosis/ treatment chapters.
{duplicate some of that here}].
80 disorders: cracking in soles, pain in foot, foot drop, numbness in feet, pain in ankles,
stiffness in ankles, cramps in calf, sciatica, tearing pain in knees, stiffness in thighs, loss
of movement in thighs, lameness, prolapse of rectum, pain in anus, twitching in scrotum,
stiffness in penis, pain in groins, pain in pelvis, pain in defecation, upward movement of
V (‘udavarta’), limping, hunch back, dwarfism, stiffness in sacral region, stiffness in
back, compression in sides, twisting pain in abdomen, cardiac dysfunction, tachycardia,
shivering in chest, constriction in chest, chest pain, wasting of arms, stiffness of neck,
stiffness of sternomastoid, hoarseness of voice, pain in jaw, cracking of lips, pain in
eyes/cleft palate, pain in teeth, loose teeth, dumbness [inability to speak], stammering,
astringent taste in mouth, dryness of mouth, loss of taste sensation, loss of smell
sensation, ear-ache, “dizziness, in ears” [??], hardness in hearing, deafness, stiffness in
eyelids, contraction in eyelids, loss of vision, pain in eyes, squint, twisting of eyebrows,
pain in the temporal region, pain in forehead, headache, cracking of scalp, facial
paralysis, monoplegia, hemiplegia, polyplegia, convulsions, tetanic convulsions, feeling
of darkness before the eyes, giddiness, tremors, yawning, hiccup, malaise, excessive
delirium, roughness, coarseness, blackish and reddish luster, insomnia, and instability of
mind.43
Su20#11
Treatment:
It is pacified by drugs having opposite quality to it’s own qualities. -Su1#59
Sweet, sour, salted, unctuous, and hot therapeutic measures, and also application
of non-unctuous and unctuous enema, snuffing, diet, massage, anointing, bath,
etc. in appropriate dose and time.
Non-unctuous and unctuous enema are the most important. They overcome all
vata symptoms like cutting down a tree at the roots surely kills all trunk, branches and
leaves.
Su20#13
Oil is also a prime remedy for V. -Vi1#13
Understanding the Powerful Nature of V:
Physicians must realize that V can often be very strong, rough and quick-acting.
Because of this it can quickly cause emergency conditions.
The doctors who do not understand this will fail, in spite of his best efforts, to
prevent the emergency from occurring, or to protect the patient from further aggravation
of suddenly vitiated V.
Su12#10
Importance of Maintaining V Within Balanced a Level:
The careful attention to maintaining balance of V is conducive to health,
improvement of strength and complexion, valor, development, improvement of
knowledge and maximum expanse of life-span.
Su12#1044
(Taken from pp.376-377,Vimanasthana:)
Vata is: rough, light, mobile, ABUNDANT, swift, cold, coarse, and non-
slimy.
Vi8#98
Due to this Quality:Vata has these Attributes:
roughnessLightnessRough, undeveloped and short body.
Continuously rough, weak, low, *adhered (?)* and hoarse voice and vigils.
Light and unsteady movements, activities diet and speech
MobilityUnstable joints, eye brows, jaw, lips, tongue, head, shoulder, hands ad feet.
AbundanceTalkativeness and abundance of tendons and venous network ***
Swiftnesshasty initiation, quick irritation and disorder.
Quick in fear, attachment and disenchantment.
Quick in acquisition but with a poor memory (retention)
Intolerance to cold.
Continuous infliction with cold, shivering and stiffness.
Coarse hairs, beard-mustaches, small hairs, nails, teeth, face, hands and
feet.
Cracked body parts.
Constant sound in joints during movement.
low degree of strength, life-span, progeny, means and wealth.
Coldness
Coarseness:
Non-sliminess
Because of the
presence of these
qualities, these
people have:
This whole chart- Vi8#98
Pitta
Qualities: Slightly unctuous, hot, sharp, liquid, sour, mobile and pungent. -45
Su1#60
Normal functions in Nature:
Adverse effects in Nature:
Elements: Agni [+ Ap] - su12#11
Normal functions in the body: vision, digestion, heat, hunger, thirst, softness in
body, complexion, lustre, cheerfulness and intellect. prowess, exhilaration, clarity
Su12#11, Su18#50
Aggravating Tastes: sour, salty, pungent - Vi1#6
Characteristics in Vitiation: heat, sharpness, fluidity, slight unctuousness [(as an
example, facial acne is slightly oily)], colors except white and reddish, fishy smell,
pungent and sour taste and movability [(i.e., a tumor may be movable, vs. fixed; also,
symptoms may spread vs. stay in one small location)].
Also seen in the parts it enters into: burning, heat, inflammation, perspiration,
moisture, sloughing, itching, discharge, redness, along with the
appearance of respective smell, color and taste.
Su20#15, Su12#11
Locations in the body: sweat, chyle, lymph, blood, and especially the stomach
Su20#8
40 Pitta disorders: heating, scorching, burning, intense burning, fuming, hyper-
acidity, burning in the stomach and esophagus, internal burning, burning in scapular
region, pyrexia, over-perspiration, foul smell in body, tearing of body parts, excessive
moisture in blood (possibly uraemic conditions), moistening of muscles, burning in skin,
tearing of skin, thickening of skin [[scleroderma]], urticarial patches, pustules, internal
hemorrhage, haemmorhagic patches, greenishness, yellowness, bluishness, herpes,
jaundice, bitterness in mouth, bloody smell from mouth, foetid smell form mouth,
excessive thirst, loss of contentment, stomatitis, inflammation in throat, inflammation in
eyes, inflammation in anus, inflammation in penis, discharge of pure blood, fainting,
green or yellow color in eyes, urine and feces.
-Su20#14
[Note: red discoloration of body parts is generally not a sign P involvement, but
rather of V involvement.]
Treatment:
P is pacified immediately by substances opposite to it’s own qualities. -Su1#60
Sweet, bitter, astringent and cold measures and application of unction, purgation,
pasting, bath, massage, etc. which alleviate pitta.
Benefit of Purgation:
Purgation is the best, because it removes the source of P quite effectively.
An analogy: In a wood stove, when we remove the fire from it’s fire-
chamber, the stove surely becomes cold.
Su20#16
Ghee is also a top remedy for P.
Vi1#1346
P is hot, sharp, liquid, of fleshy smell, sour and pungent.
Because of this Quality:
Pitta has this Attribute:
hotness
sharpness
liquidity
fleshy smell
pungency and sourness
Because of the presence of all of these
qualities, P person having predominance in
P are:
intolerant to heat, having hot face, delicate
and fair organs, plenty of moles, freckles,
black moles and pimples excessive hunger
and thirst, early appearance of wrinkles,
greying and falling of hairs, mostly soft,
sparse, and brown beard-mustaches,
“small hairs and hairs”
sharp prowess, intense fire, taking plenty of
food and drink, lack of endurance,
frequently eating
lax and soft joints and muscles, excess
secretion of sweat, urine and faeces
excessive foetid smell in axilla, mouth, head
and body
little semen, little sexual act, and few
progeny
moderate in strength, life-span, knowledge,
understanding, wealth, means.
This whole chart- Vi8#97
Kapha
Qualities: heaviness, coldness, softness, unctuousness, sweetness, immobility
[stability] and sliminess.
-Su1#61
Normal functions in Nature:
Adverse effects in Nature:
Normal functions in the body: unctuousness, binding, firmness, heaviness,47
potency, strength, forbearance, restraint, and absence of greed.
-Su18#51
Firmness, development, enthusiasm, potency, knowledge, understanding -
Su12#12
Characteristics in Vitiation: unctuousness, coldness, whiteness, heaviness,
sweetness, stability, sliminess, softness. It exerts these actions on the body parts it
enters: whiteness, coldness, itching, immobility, heaviness, unctuousness, numbness,
moistening, mucous covering, binding sweetness, chronicity [slow pace/ non-resolving of
conditions]. -Su20#18
K Can Also Produce Weakness and Depletion Disorders:
Emaciation and laxity (non-compactness of the tissues) can be produced
by vitiated K, as described here:
“It produces these symptoms: laxity, emaciation, idleness,
impotency, ignorance, confusion and other conditions.” -Su12#12
Locations in the body: chest, head, neck, joints, stomach, fat, and especially the
chest
Su20#8
20 disorders: saturation, drowsiness, excessive sleep, cold sensation, heaviness in
body, lassitude, sweetness in mouth, salivation, mucous expectoration, excess dirt, excess
mucous, indigestion, “plastering” of heart*, plastering of throat, accumulation in
vessels*, goitre, over-plump-ness, urticarial eruptions, urticarial patches, white lustre,
whiteness in urine, eyes and feces.
Su20#17
*These are perhaps among the few direct references in the Charaka to arterial
plaque.
Treatment:
Substances having the opposite qualities to K reduce it.
-Su1#61
Pungent, bitter, astringent, sharp, hot and rough measures.
Also fomentation, emesis, snuffing, exercise, etc. .
Benefits of Emesis for Treating K:
Emesis is the best. It works surely, just as rice plants will surely dry out
and die when the rice field’s earth water dam is opened up.
-Su20#19
Honey is a top remedy for K. -Vi1#13
Kapha is: unctuous, smooth, soft, sweet, “essence” [the best quality of the tissues/
the solid part of the body], solid, dull, rigid, heavy, cold, slimy, and clear.
Because of this Quality:Kapha people have this Attribute:
unctuousnessunctuous organs48
smoothnesssmooth organs
softnesspleasing, delicate and fair organs
sweetnessabundant semen, sexual act and progeny
nature of essenceexcellent, compact and stable body
solidityall organs well-developed and perfect
dullnessdull in activities, diet, and speech
rigidity“delayed initiation, irritation, and disorder”
[delayed irritation? Delayed disorder?...probably not]
heaviness*”movements supported with essence and stability”
coldnesslittle hunger, thirst, pyrexia and perspiration
Sliminess
{make separate box:}
Clarity
{make separate box:}
Because of the presence of all of these qualities, K persons are:Well-united and strong joint ligaments
Clear eyes and face with clear and unctuous complexion and
affectionate voice.
Strong, wealthy, learned, brave, calm and long-lived.
This whole chart- Vi8#9649
ANATOMY:
The 10 seats of vital breath
Cardiovascular system
The 6 layers of skin
The 360 bones
Sense organs
The 56 body sub-parts
Conjectured anatomy
Body fluids
Predominance of the 5 elements in body parts
The 7 dhatus (body tissues)
Process of dhatu nourishment
Use of rasa and mala to treat the dhatus
Ojas
Increase and decrease of dhatus
Signs of diminution of dhatus
Blood/ Treatment of disorders of blood
Sara- constitutional essence
Srotas- body channels
Chart of the main srotas
Morbidity of the srotas50
Detailed knowledge of the human body is necessary for the well-being of the
body. After getting knowledge about the entities of the body, one is able to know about
the factors which are useful to the body. Hence the detailed knowledge of the body is
commended by the experts.
Sa6#3
Ten Seats of Vital Breath:
2 -temples
3 -vital organs (heart, bladder, head)
throat
blood
semen
ojas
ano-rectal region
Su29#3
About the Heart:
It’s synonymous names: hrdaya [heart], mahat (great), and artha (serving all
purposes)
Su30#3
The body with six divisions, intellect, sense organs, five sense objects, self
together with qualities, mind alongwith it’s objects are located in heart. -Su30#4
The heart is the substratum of these entities like the central girder of the small
beams in a house. -Su30#5
One gets fainting on it’s injury and death on it’s severe painful condition. -
Su30#5
Life known by the sense perception “(reflexes)” is located there. -Su30#6
It is the seat of excellent Ojas and reservoir of consciousness. -Su30#7
That is why the heart is known as “Mahat” (great) and “artha” (serving all
purposes).
Su30#7
Dhamanis (arteries) are called so due to pulsation,
Su30#12
Srotas (channels) are called so due to flowing
Su30#12
Siras (veins) are called so due to moving swiftly
Su30#12
The ten great vessels:
From the heart, ten great vessels carrying Ojas pulsate all over the body. -Su30#8
In the heart attached are ten vessels rooted there and of great significance. -
Su30#3
The vessels are called mahaphala (having important fruit or great variety of fruits
((see notes on Ojas for further information)) ). [This refers to the various beneficial51
effects which are produced by Ojas, which is carried by the vessels.]
Su30#9-11
To protect the heart, the great vessels, and Ojas:
Avoid particularly the afflictions of the mind. -Su30#13
Regularly take the measures which are conducive to heart an ojas and
cleansing of srotas, and make efforts for serenity of mind and knowledge. -Su30#14
Anatomy; Enumeration of Body Parts
Note: for both categories (demonstrable and non-demonstrable; gross anatomy and
microanatomy) – the following enumerations are exactly the same for all persons, except
for persons with abnormal body constitutions [i.e., birth defects].
Skin:
There are 6 layers of the skin, which cover the entire body.
Sa7#4
The 6 Layers of the Skin:
1st- the outermost layer is known as ‘udakadhara’ (that which holds up [keeps out/
in] water).
2nd- it is that which hold up [keeps in] blood.
3rd- is the seat of the origin of sidhma and kilasa (leucoderma).
4th-is the seat of the origin of ring worm and leprosy.
5th-is the seat of the origin of alaji (a type of boil) and vidradhi (abscess).
6th- is that which, if cut, causes loss of consciousness and is the seat of the origin
of boils being manifested as blackish red and deep rooted on the joints and are hardly
curable.
Sa7#4
Body Parts:
The entire body is divided into 6 parts- 2 upper extremities [arms], 2 lower
extremities [legs], head-neck and trunk (chest and abdomen).
Sa7#552
Bones:
There are 360 bones including teeth sockets and nails.
They are:
32 teeth
32 teeth sockets
20 nails
60 phalangeal bones of hands and feet
20 metaphalangeal bones of hands and feet
4
metaphallangeal support in hands and feet
2
calcaneum
4
andles (in feet)
2
wrists bones (in hands)
4
forearms
4
legs
2
knee
2
janukapala (knee caps)
2
thighs
2
arms
2
shoulders
2
shoulder blades
2
clavicles
1
xiphisternum
2
palate bones
2
hip bones
1
pubis
45 back
15 neck
14 chest
24 ribs (both sides)
24 rib sockets (both sides)
24 tubercles in rib sockets (both sides)
1
mandible
2
extremities of the mandible53
1
2
4
nose, zygomatic process and forehead
temporals
skull bones
360 Total Count:
Sa7#6
Seats of Senses:
There are 5 seats of senses, which are:
Skin, tongue, nose, eyes and ears.
Sa7#7
The 5 Sense organs:
touch, taste, smell, sight and sound.
Sa7#7
The 5 Motor Organs:
hands, feet, anus, genitals, ‘speech organ’ [tongue/ voice box/ both].
Sa7#8
The 1 Seat of Consciousness:
This is the heart.
Sa7#8
The 10 Seats of Vital Breath:
head, throat, heart, navel, anus, bladder, ojas, semen, blood and flesh.
Of them, the first 6 are known as ‘marmas’ (vital organs [vital points]).
Sa7#9
The 15 Visceral Organs:
navel, heart, kloman [pancreas], liver, spleen, kidneys, urinary bladder, ‘caecum’,
stomach, jejunum, rectum, antu, small intestines, large intestines, omentum.
Sa7#10
The 56 Sub-Parts of the Body:
There are 56 sub-parts associated with the 6 major parts [(trunk, arms, etc.)].
They are:
2
calves
2
thighs
2
buttocks
2
testicles
1
penis
2
ukha (axilla)
2
groin (sides of scrotum)
2
ischeal tuberosities
1
pubis
1
abdomen
2
breasts
2
arms54
2
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
2
2
2
2
4
2
2
1
4forearms
chin
lips
corners of mouth
gums
palate
uvula
upajihvika (tonsils)
gojihvika (tongue)
cheeks
ear pinnae
lower portion of the ear pinnea
eye orbit
eye lids
pupils of eye
eye brows
thyroid
soles of hands and feet
56Total Sub-Parts:
Sa7#11
The 9 Major Orifices:
7 in the head- (2 eyes, 2 ears, 2 nostrils, 1 mouth )
2 below - ( urethra, anus) [note- vagina is not included]
Sa7#12
Demonstrable Vs. Conjectured Anatomy:
What has been enumerated so far is visible and can be demonstrated.
But there are many body parts which are more subtle or minute, and so cannot be
demonstrated, but only conjectured.
Sa7#13-14
The following Anatomy is Conjectured:
900
Ligaments:
700
Sira (veins)
200
Dhamani (arteries)
400 Muscles
107 Vital Organs
200 Joints
29,956 The end portion of minute branches of blood vessels [capillaries]
29,956 Head hair, beard and mustaches, skin hairs [total of all/ vs. count for each]
Sa7#1455
Now the entities measurable in the unit of number of ‘anjali’ are mentioned.
An anjali is a unit of measure generally equal to ‘a handful’, weighing 160gm.
However, for measurement of body fluids, the hand size should be the hand of the
patient. (So a child will have 2 small anjalis of fat, and an adult will have 2 large anjalis
of fat.)
[In some cases, this equal what can be held in the 2 hands cupped together.]]
These figures indicate mean standard and as such there is a scope of increase or
decrease. [There is some range in volume from person to person.]
This information is also known by conjecture rather than by direct observation.
The following list of body components are liquid in form, and that is why they are
best quantified by using a measurement of volume, such as anjalis.
10 anjalis of fluid [basically water] which if discharged accompanies feces,
urine, blood or other dhatus, circulating in the entire body is held up by the
outermost layer of the skin, beneath the skin exists as lymph exuding through
wounds; under influence of heat goes out of the hair follicles as sweat.
9 anjalis of the 1st dhatu being product of food and which is known as rasa.
8 anjalis of blood [rakta].
7 anjalis of feces.
6 anjalis of K. ***
5 anjalis of P. ***
4 anjalis of urine.
3 anjalis of muscle fat.
2 anjalis of fat.
1 anjali of bone marrow.
½ anjali of brain substance.
½ anjali of semen
½ anjali of Ojas (which is the nature of K).
[This chart is very worth studying from the point of view of understanding P and K.
P and K are actual quantify-able, visible body entities.**. Presumably V is not56
listed with any anjalis because it has no material form of it’s own.]
‘Thus in essence the body is described.’
Sa7#15
Predominance of The 5 Elements in the Body Parts:
Body Parts Predominant in Parthiva (Earth element):
the body part which is particularly thick, stable, massive, heavy, coarse and hard;
and nails, bones, teeth, flesh, skin, feces, hairs, beards and mustaches, skin hairs,
tendons etc. along with smell and olfactory sense.
Body Parts Predominant in Apya (Water Element):
The liquid, mobile, dull, unctuous, soft and slimy;
rasa, blood, muscle-fat, K, P [it is surprising -but significant- that P has not been
put under fire element], urine, sweat etc. alongwith taste and gustatory sense.
Body Parts Predominant in Agneya (Fire Element):
P [so, P has been put in both water and fire elements], heat, lustre along with
vision and visual sense.
Body Parts Predominant in ‘Vayaviya’ (Air Element):
respiration, twinkling of eye, contraction and relaxation, movement, propulsion
and retention alongwith touch and tactile sense.
Body Parts Predominant in Antariksa (Space Element):
the vacant space, big and small channels, alongwith sound and auditory sense.
“Whatever impels is the principal one (principle of consciousness) along with intellect
and mind.”
“Thus enumeration of body parts is done grossly.”
Sa7#16
The body components according to division in smallest units (cells) are
innumerable due to over-abundance, over-minuteness and transcending perception.
The causative agent in conjunction and disjunction of cells is vayu [V dosha/ air
element] and also the nature of activities.
Sa7#17
Thus the body having many parts and enumerated above if seen ‘synthetically’ [as
a synthesis; as a whole] leads to attachment and viewed analytically leads to
emancipation.
The principle one (consciousness) which is detached retires after all existent
entities cease to exist.
Sa7#18
Summing up–
The physician who knows the enumeration of body parts does not get confused
due to it’s ignorance.
One who is free from ignorance does not get overcome by the defects caused by it
and as such he, devoid of defects and desires, calm, attains everlasting peace because he57
is not reborn.
Sa7#19-20
Tissues:
Dhatus: Rasa, Rakta, Mamsa, Meda, Asthi, Majja, Shukra/Artava
(The Dhatus are the body’s tissues. They are: Rasa- blood plasma; Rakta-
red blood tissue; Mamsa- muscle; Meda- adipose tissue; Asthi- bone; Majja- marrow
and nerve tissue; Shukra- male reproductive tissue; and Artava- female reproductive
tissue.)
Heaviness/ Density of the dhatus: They are heavier in progressive order, from
rasa to shukra.
Process of nourishment from dhatu to dhatu:
Dhatus continue in their normalcy by receiving nutrients form the preceding
dhatu. So Mamsa is nourished by and from Rakta, Meda by Mamsa, etc. -Su28#3
Process of Nourishment from Food to Dhatu:
-Food taken in various forms eaten, drunk, licked and devoured– which is wholesome for
the person, being consumed properly by the respective agnis, participating in the non-
stopping process of conversion of all dhatus (metabolism) like time and “which does not
affect dhatuwagnis, V and srotas” (channels), “endows the entire body with development,
strength, lustre and happy life and provides energy to the body tissues.”
-Dhatus continue in their normalcy by receiving nutrients from the (preceding)
dhatu.
Su28#3
-(During this process) rasa known as the clear essence of food and the excretion
known as the waste products are produced.
-The excretion nourishes sweat, urine, feces, V, P and K; dirt of ears, eyes,58
nostrils, mouth, hair follicles and genitals, and the parts like hair, beard, moustaches,
nails etc.
-From “ahara-rasa” (essence of food) are nourished rasa, rakta (blood), mamsa
(muscle), medas (fat), asthi (bones), majja (marrow), sukra (semen) and ojas, the basic
materials of 5 sense organs which are known as “dhatu prasada” (clear essence of
dhatus), and parts like ligaments, lubricating substance in joints etc.
-All these dhatus (supporting materials) in the forms of essence and excretion maintain
their normal measures according to age and body receiving proper nutrients from rasa
and mala respectively.
-Thus both rasa and mala, present in their normal measure, maintain the
equilibrium of dhatus which is already there in the body.
-In case of decrease or increase in dhatus known as essence, rasa produced by food
causing increase or decrease respectively restores the equilibrium for health, likewise, in
case of excretion.
-The excretions or waste products, when exceed their normal measure, are treated
with cold and hot properties, as required, and thus they restore the equilibrium of dhatus.
Su28#4
-For the “supporting materials” (food essence and dhatu excretions), “srotas”
(channels) are the pathways.
-These, according to division, fill up respective supporting materials [here
meaning dhatus], thus this body is a product of the food– eaten, drunk, licked and
devoured.
-Similarly, the diseases also are produced by the food– eaten, drunk, licked and
devoured, and will fill up the supporting dhatus by the same process as healthy nutrients
do.
Su28#5
Role of Rasa ([[chyle/taste/chyme/blood plasma]]) and Malas (the wastes) in
maintaining the balance of the Dhatus:
Rasa [Liquid food in the blood stream)] and Mala, present in their normal
measure, maintain the equilibrium of the dhatus.
Su28#4
Use of “Rasa” and Mala to treat imbalance of the Dhatus:
In case of decrease or increase in dhatus, both rasa and malas can be used create
increase or decrease. -Su28#4
Malas are treated with cold and hot properties, as required, (to decrease or
increase flow), and thus (along with adjustment of Rasa) they restore equilibrium of the
Dhatus.
(Rasa will be treated by changing the food eaten, and by regulating Jathar Agni).
Su28#459
Ojas:
It maintains the living beings by it’s saturation;
Without ojas no life of creatures exists,
It is the initial essence of embryo and also the essence of the embryo’s nourishing
material,
It enters into the cardiac cycle first,
If it is destroyed, it leads to destruction of that person,
It is the sustainer
It is located in the heart,
It is the cream of the nutrient fluid in the body,
It is where vital factors are established,
It is the fruit of them [vital factors] or they produce various types of fruits
(effects).
Su30#9-11
Hence since the [blood] vessels carry the Ojas, they are called “mahaphala”
(“having important fruit or great variety if fruits”). -Su30#9-11
The substance of white or red, slightly yellowish color which resides in the heart.
It has the color of ghee, the taste of honey, and the smell of fried paddy.
“In the body of the living beings it is produced first”.
[Interpretation: 1) on-going, it is the 1st metabolic stage of food transformation
before production of the other dhatus. Or 2) embryologically it is produced at the
beginning of development.]
The person dies if it is destroyed. -Su17#74-75.1
Description of Ojas: color of gold, red, ghee, taste of honey, smell of fried grain
paddy, residing in the heart, nourished by all dhatus, like bees gathering pollen for honey
Cause of diminution of Ojas: excessive exercise, fasting, anxiety, rough, little and
measured diet, wind and the sun, fear, grief, un-unctuous drinks, vigil, excessive
discharge of mucus, blood, semen and other excreta, time-factor (in old age and receiving
seasons) and injury by organisms.
On Increase and Decrease of Dhatus:
Cause of Health and Disease of the Body:
Body is defined as the seat of consciousness, composed of the aggregate of the
products of 5 mahabhutas and carrying on in the state of equilibrium. When in this body
the “Dhatus (constituents)” get imbalanced, the body gets subjected to disease or
destruction.
Sa6#460
Definition of Imbalanced State of Dhatus:
The state of imbalanced dhatus means their increase or decrease partially or wholly.
Sa6#4
Simultaneous Increase and Decrease of Contrary Dhatus:
Mutually contrary dhatus (dhatus with opposite qualities, i.e. dense vs. liquid,
sour vs. sweet) undergo increase and decrease simultaneously, because that drug which
causes the increase of one dhatu, decreases the other dhatu possessing contrary
properties.
Sa6#5
Therapeutic Increase or Decrease of Dhatus as Necessary:
Hence the properly administered therapy brings back the decreased as well as the
increased dhatus to the state of equilibrium by reducing the increased ones and increasing
the diminished ones.
Sa6#6
Balanced Dhatus- the Sole Objective of Therapy:
This the sole desired objective in the administration of therapy as well as the
observance of the code of conduct for the healthy is that there should be equilibrium of
dhatus. Hence the wise healthy persons use suitable food substances and dietary
preparations alternately. In case they use the same mainly of one type, they adopt
some contradictory physical activity in order to maintain equilibrium.
Sa6#7
Instructions for Health (Balanced Dhatus), In a Nut Shell:
*Proper use of actions and food preparations contrary to the properties of place,
time and the self, avoidance of excessive, perverted and negative use of time, intellect
and sense objects, non-suppression of impelled urges and avoidance of over-exertion; this
is, in a nut shell, the code of conduct for the healthy in order to maintain equilibrium.
Sa6#8
Use of Similar and Contrary Diet for Increase and Decrease of Dhatus:
Dhatus of the body get increased by the prolonged use of the food substances
having similar or mostly similar properties while they get decreased by the prolonged use
of the food substances having contrary or mostly contrary properties.
Sa6#9
These are the properties of the body constituents which can be enumerated such
as– heaviness-lightness, coldness-hotness, unctuousness-roughness, dullness-sharpness,
stability-mobility, softness-hardness, non-sliminess-sliminess, smoothness-coarseness,
minuteness-grossness, solidity-liquidity. Out of them the constituents having heaviness
are increased by the prolonged use of heavy food items while those having lightness is
increased by the light food items and the heaviness is decreased. In this way, all
properties of the constituents are increased by the use of similar substances and decreased
by that of contrary ones. Hence flesh is increased more in comparison with the other
dhatus by (the use of) flesh, similarly, blood by blood, fat by fat, muscle-fat by muscle-
fat, bone by cartilage, bone marrow by bone marrow, semen by semen and fetus by
immature fetus (egg).61
Sa6#10
In case, according to this similarity there is no availability of the similar food
substances or, even if available, they can not be used due to impropriety or disgust or
some other reason and the dhatu is to be increased necessarily, then the use of the food
substances from different sources having predominance in similar properties is
recommended such as- in deficiency of semen, the use of milk and ghee and other
important sweet, unctuous and cold substances; in the decrease of urine, the use of
sugarcane juice, saline and moistening substances; in diminution of feces, boiled cereals,
black gram, mushroom, trunk of the goat, vastuka, vinegar prepared of rice; in diminution
of V, the use of pungent, bitter, astringent, rough, light and cold substances; in
diminution of P, the use of sour, salty, pungent, alkaline, hot and sharp substances and in
diminution of , the use of unctuous, heavy, sweet, solid and slimy substances. The
activities also may be performed which may lead to increase of the respective dhatu.
Thus increase and decrease may be effected in other body constituents as well intime by
application of similar and dissimilar substances. Thus the factors for increasing and
decreasing in respect of all dhatus are explained individually and generally.
Sa6#11
General Factors Leading to Body Growth:
These factors lead to the growth of the body in it’s entirety such as– observance
of time, natural process, excellence of diet and absence of damage.
Sa6#12
General Factors Leading to Greater Strength:
These factors lead to the increase of strength: birth in a place having strong
persons, that in a time conducive for strength [i.e., late winter, spring], favorable time,
excellence of seed and soil [[sukra and dhatus/ ovum]], excellence of diet, body,
suitability and psyche; natural mechanism, youth, physical exercise and cheerfulness.
Sa6#13
Factors Responsible for Digestion of Food Into Dhatus:
* These are the factors leading to transformation of food: heat, vayu [air/ Vata],
moisture, unctuousness, time and balanced use. ** [in other words, leading to proper
digestion and metabolism of food into tissues, rather than into mucus, ama and toxic
excretions.]
Sa6#14
*Explanation of/ Function of the Factors of Digestion:
heat digests
vayu [air/ Vata] absorbs
moisture produces looseness [of the food particles]
unction generates softness [of the food particles]
time brings sufficiency
balanced use brings about equilibrium of dhatus which are the products of
digestion.
Sa6#15
Food as Nourishment Vs. Cause of Disease:62
The food components under transformation, if they are not contradictory, are
converted into the respective body parts but, in case they are contradictory or damaged
by antagonistic ones, they inflict the body.
Sa6#16
The 2 Groups of Body Substances:
The components of the body, in brief, are of 2 categories– waste products and
assimilable products.
Definition of Waste Products:
Those which (if retained) cause affliction in the body.
Examples of Waste Products In the Body:
smear in body orifices of different origins moving outwards, dhatus after full
maturity, vitiated V, P and K (“when they exhaust their lifespan”) [I perhaps disagree
with Sharma’s addition here; Charaka has already said ‘vitiated’, meaning increased
excessively] and other similar entities which, if retained, cause affliction in the body.
Definition and Examples of Assimilable Products:
Those not included above. They have (20) properties beginning with heaviness
and ending with liquidity (as mentioned above) [See The 10 Pairs of Qualities] and
dhatus from rasa to sukra [the 7 Dhatus/ Body Tissues].
Sa6#17
Effect of the Doshas on Assimilable and Waste Body Products:
V, P and K, if deranged, affect all the above entities morbidly due to their nature
of causing morbidity. The movement of the vitiated dosas is limited to the impact on
body constituents. The result of the doshas in normal state is freedom from disorder
(health). Hence the wise should attempt for their normalcy.
Sa6#18